new proposal for challenge endpoint (#112)
oauth-wg/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth: draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.md

Client Attester:
: An entity that authenticates a Client Instance and attests it by issuing a Client Attestation JWT.

Challenge:

> : A String that is the input to a cryptographic challenge-response pattern. This is traditionally called nonce within OAuth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: A String that is the input to a cryptographic challenge-response pattern. This is traditionally called a nonce within OAuth.
```

* `exp`: REQUIRED. The `exp` (expiration time) claim MUST specify the time at which the Client Attestation PoP is considered expired. The authorization server MUST reject any JWT with an expiration time that has passed, subject to allowable clock skew between systems. Note that the authorization server may reject JWTs with an "exp" claim value that is unreasonably far in the future.
* `aud`: REQUIRED. The `aud` (audience) claim MUST specify a value that identifies the authorization server as an intended audience. The {{RFC8414}} issuer identifier URL of the authorization server MUST be used as a value for an "aud" element to identify the authorization server as the intended audience of the JWT.
* `jti`: REQUIRED. The `jti` (JWT identifier) claim MUST specify a unique identifier for the Client Attestation PoP. The authorization server MAY ensure that JWTs are not replayed by maintaining the set of used "jti" values for the length of time for which the JWT would be considered valid based on the applicable "exp" instant.

> * `challenge`: OPTIONAL. The `challenge` (challenge) claim MUST specify a String value that is provided by the authorization server to associate the Client Attestation PoP JWT with a particular transaction and prevent replay attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `challenge`: OPTIONAL. The `challenge` (challenge) claim MUST specify a String value that is provided by the authorization server to include in the Client Attestation PoP JWT.
```

I know this language wasn't modified in the PR but just took the opportunity to make a minor edit.

Reviewer: Generally the challenge really provides the AS with an assurance around freshness when taken to the extreme this can then be used to detect replay attacks but certain implementations might allow for limited replay-ability of challenges for other reasons such as scalability.

  "nbf":1300815780,
  "exp":1300819380,
  "jti": "d25d00ab-552b-46fc-ae19-98f440f25064",

>   "challenge" : "5c1a9e10-29ff-4c2b-ae73-57c0957c09c4"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "challenge": "5c1a9e10-29ff-4c2b-ae73-57c0957c09c4"
```

2. There is precisely one OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP HTTP request header field, where its value is a single well-formed JWT conforming to the syntax outlined in [](client-attestation-pop-jwt).
3. The signature of the Client Attestation PoP JWT obtained from the OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP HTTP header verifies with the Client Instance Key contained in the `cnf` claim of the Client Attestation JWT obtained from the OAuth-Client-Attestation HTTP header.

> An error parameter according to Section 3 of {{RFC6750}} SHOULD be included to indicate why a request was declined. If the client attestation is absent or not using an expected server-provided challenge, the value `use_attestation_challenge` can be used to indicate that an attestation with a server-provided challenge was expected. If the attestation was present but could not be successfully verified, the value `invalid_client_attestation` is used.

Reviewer: Given the whole error parameter here is already a SHOULD i think its already covered, but im ok if we want to be more explicit.

> An error parameter according to Section 3 of {{RFC6750}} SHOULD be included to indicate why a request was declined. If the Client Attestation is absent or not using an expected server-provided challenge, the value `use_attestation_challenge` can be used to indicate that an attestation with a server-provided challenge was expected. If the attestation was present but could not be successfully verified, the value `invalid_client_attestation` is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An error parameter according to Section 3 of {{RFC6750}} SHOULD be included to indicate why a request was declined. If the Client Attestation is absent or not using an expected server-provided challenge, the value `use_attestation_challenge` can be used to indicate that an attestation with a server-provided challenge was expected. If the attestation and proof of possession was present but could not be successfully verified, the value `invalid_client_attestation` is used.
```

2. After the '~' character, there exists precisely a single well-formed JWT conforming to the syntax outlined in [](client-attestation-pop-jwt).
3. The signature of the Client Attestation PoP JWT obtained after the '~' character verifies with the Client Instance Key contained in the `cnf` claim of the Client Attestation JWT obtained before the '~' character.

# Challenge Retrieval {#challenge-retrieval}

> This section defines an optional mechanism that allows a Client to request a fresh Challenge from the Authorization Server to be used for the OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP. This construct may be similar or equivalent to a nonce, see [](terminology). The challenge is opaque to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines an optional mechanism that allows a Client to request a fresh Challenge from the Authorization Server to be included in the Client Attestation PoP JWT. This construct may be similar or equivalent to a nonce, see [](terminology). The challenge is opaque to the client.
```

> An Authorization Server MAY offer a challenge endpoint, that it MUST signal via the metadata entry `challenge_endpoint`. If the Authorization Server offers a challenge endpoint, the Client MUST retrieve a challenge and MUST use this challenge in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Authorization Server MAY offer a challenge endpoint which it MUST signal support for via inclusion of the 
`challenge_endpoint` entry in the Authorisation Server metadata response as defined in RFC8414. If the Authorization Server offers a challenge endpoint, the Client MUST retrieve a challenge and MUST use this challenge in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).
```

Just checking we are intending all AS's MUST support RFC 8414 with this language, that could be somewhat strict.

Author: ```suggestion
An Authorization Server MAY offer a challenge endpoint for Clients to fetch Challenges in the context of this specification. If the Authorization Server supports metadata as defined in {{RFC8414}}, it MUST signal support for the challenge endpoint by including the metadata entry `challenge_endpoint`. If the Authorization Server offers a challenge endpoint, the Client MUST retrieve a challenge and MUST use this challenge in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).
```

Author: Similarity to OpenID4VCI: A Credential Issuer that requires c_nonce values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see [Section 8.2](https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.

> A request for a Challenge is made by sending an HTTP POST request to the URL provided in the challenge_endpoint parameter of the Authorization Server metadata.

Reviewer 3: Now that there's a dedicated endpoint, this should be registered in the iana registry i think?

Reviewer: Agreed we should add an IANA registration request here for this element.

Reviewer: Added in https://github.com/oauth-wg/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/pull/112/commits/f1fef28c224fee753ea2c436463123cee76a96b9

The following is a non-normative example of a request:

~~~
POST /as/challenge HTTP/1.1
Host: as.example.com
Accept: application/json
~~~

The Authorization Server provides a Challenge in the HTTP response with a 200 status code and the following parameters included in the message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type:

> * attestation-challenge: REQUIRED. String containing a Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).

Reviewer 3: Standard practice is to use snake case, specific reason to use `-` here?

```suggestion
* attestation_challenge: REQUIRED. String containing a Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).
```

The Authorization Server MUST make the response uncacheable by adding a `Cache-Control` header field including the value `no-store`. The Authorization Server MAY add additional challenges or data.

The following is a non-normative example of a response:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Host: as.example.com

> attestation-challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ

Reviewer 3: I think it should look something like this

```suggestion
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "attestation_challenge": "AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ"
}
```

Reviewer 3: At least that's how i understood the "message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type" from above

Reviewer 4: Yeah, we didn't get to finish that part yesterday - your proposal looks good

Reviewer: While we are doing the renaming, do we want maybe consider something that might give us a little more collision resistance e.g `oauth-client-attestation-challenge`? Don't feel too strongly about it

Author: @tplooker I feel the same, but DPoP also has no prefix

A request for a Challenge is made by sending an HTTP POST request to the URL provided in the challenge_endpoint parameter of the Authorization Server metadata.

The following is a non-normative example of a request:

~~~
POST /as/challenge HTTP/1.1
Host: as.example.com
Accept: application/json
~~~

The Authorization Server provides a Challenge in the HTTP response with a 200 status code and the following parameters included in the message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type:
* attestation_challenge: REQUIRED. String containing a Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).

The Authorization Server MUST make the response uncacheable by adding a `Cache-Control` header field including the value `no-store`. The Authorization Server MAY add additional challenges or data.

The following is a non-normative example of a response:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Host: as.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "attestation_challenge": "AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ"
}
~~~

## Providing Challenges on Previous Successful Responses

> The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge on any previous successful response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "attestation-challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP.

Author: ```suggestion
The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge on any previous successful response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "Attestation-Challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP.
```

The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Response containing a fresh Challenge:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 302 Found

> attestation-challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ

Author: ```suggestion
Attestation-Challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ
```

An Authorization Server MAY offer a challenge endpoint for Clients to fetch Challenges in the context of this specification. If the Authorization Server supports metadata as defined in {{RFC8414}}, it MUST signal support for the challenge endpoint by including the metadata entry `challenge_endpoint` containing the URL of the endpoint as its value. If the Authorization Server offers a challenge endpoint, the Client MUST retrieve a challenge and MUST use this challenge in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).

A request for a Challenge is made by sending an HTTP POST request to the URL provided in the challenge_endpoint parameter of the Authorization Server metadata.

The following is a non-normative example of a request:

~~~
POST /as/challenge HTTP/1.1
Host: as.example.com
Accept: application/json
~~~

The Authorization Server provides a Challenge in the HTTP response with a 200 status code and the following parameters included in the message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type:

> * attestation_challenge: REQUIRED. String containing a Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt).

Reviewer 2: Can we make it optionally REQUIRED for the purposes of this specification but generally OPTIONAL if this endpoint happens to find its use in future extensions?

Reviewer 4: Hmm do you have a proposal on wording for this?

Reviewer 2: Smth like this?

> String containing a OPTIONAL. Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt). REQUIRED if the authorization server supports {{this specification/attestation based client auth}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* attestation_challenge: REQUIRED if the authorization server supports Client Attestations and server provided challenges as described in this document. String containing a Challenge to be used in the OAuth-Attestation-PoP as defined in (#client-attestation-pop-jwt). The intention of this element not being required in other circumstances is to preserve the ability for the challenge endpoint to be used in other applications unrelated to client attestations.
```

The Authorization Server MUST make the response uncacheable by adding a `Cache-Control` header field including the value `no-store`. The Authorization Server MAY add additional challenges or data.

The following is a non-normative example of a response:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Host: as.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "attestation_challenge": "AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ"
}
~~~

## Providing Challenges on Previous Responses

> The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge on any previous successful response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "attestation-challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP. Note that this also includes error responses.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge on any previous successful response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "Attestation-Challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP. Note that this also includes error responses.
```

> The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge on any previous successful response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP. Note that this also includes error responses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Authorization Server MAY provide a fresh Challenge with any HTTP response using a HTTP header-based syntax. The HTTP header field parameter MUST be named "OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge" and contain the value of the Challenge. The Client MUST use this new Challenge for the next OAuth-Client-Attestation-PoP.
```

The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Response containing a fresh Challenge:

~~~

> HTTP/1.1 302 Found
> OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ
> Location: https://Wallet.example.org/cb?
>   code=SplxlOBeZQQYbYS6WxSbIA

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Cache-Control: no-store
OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ
Pragma: no-cache

{
  "access_token":"2YotnFZFEjr1zCsicMWpAA",
  "token_type":"example",
  "expires_in":3600,
  "refresh_token":"tGzv3JOkF0XG5Qx2TlKWIA",
  "example_parameter":"example_value"
}
```

Reviewer 2: ```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Cache-Control: no-store
OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge: AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTZ

{
  "access_token": "2YotnFZFEjr1zCsicMWpAA",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 3600
}
```

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: This is a very poor example as it indicates a 302 from an authorization endpoint to the user-agent which the client has no way of getting the `OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge` out of. Please use an example such as a 200 OK from the token endpoint.

- The authorization server may expect the usage of a challenge in the Client Attestation PoP JWT, but instead of providing the challenge explicitly, the client may implicitly reuse an existing artefact, e.g. the authorization code. The authorization server MUST ensure that the challenge provides sufficient entropy.

The approach using a challenge explicitly provided by the authorization server gives stronger replay attack detection guarantees, however support by the authorization server is OPTIONAL to simplify mandatory implementation requirements. The "jti" method is mandatory and hence acts as a default fallback.

# Appendix A IANA Considerations

## OAuth Parameters Registration

This specification requests registration of the following values in the IANA "OAuth Authorization Server Metadata" registry {{IANA.OAuth.Params}} established by {{RFC8414}}.

> * Metadata Name: client_attestation_pop_challenge_required

Author: exchage this with challenge_endpoint

The guidance provided by {{RFC7519}} and {{RFC8725}} applies.

## Replay Attacks {#security-consideration-replay}

> An Authorization Server MUST implement measures to detect replay attacks by the Client Instance. In the context of this specification, this means to detect that an attacker is resending any Client Attestation PoP JWT an Authorization Server. The following options are RECOMMENDED for this client authentication method:

Reviewer 2: > An Authorization Server MUST implement measures to detect replay attacks by the Client Instance.

This seems overly strong. I don't think we need replay protection requirements any stronger for this auth method than we have for DPoP or private_key_jwt do. In there IIRC it's a recommendation at best.

Reviewer 2: Furthermore, it should be permitted to re-use the same challenge if new one was not received or manually retrieved.

Quoting from DPoP:

> Server-provided nonces are an effective means for further reducing the chances for successful DPoP proof replay. Unlike cryptographic nonces, it is acceptable for clients to use the same nonce multiple times and for the server to accept the same nonce multiple times. As long as the jti value is tracked and duplicates are rejected for the lifetime of the nonce, there is no additional risk of token replay.

What i'm looking for here is flexibility in the deployed protection proportional to the use case this method is deployed in.

- The Authorization Server manages a list of witnessed `jti` values of the Client Attestation PoP JWT for the time window of which the JWT would be considered valid. This sliding time window is based on the `iat` of the Client Attestation PoP and and the duration chosen by the Authorization Server. If any Client Attestation PoP JWT would be replayed, the Authorization Server would recognize the `jti` value in the list and respond with an authentication error. Details how to implement such a data structure to maintain `jti` values is given in [](#implementation-consideration-replay).
- The Authorization Server provides a challenge as an `OAuth-Client-Attestation-Challenge` in the challenge endpoint to the Client Instance and the Client uses it as a `challenge` value in the Client Attestation PoP JWT. The Authorization Server may chose to:

>   - manage a list of witnissed `challenge` values, similar to the previously described `jti` approach. Details how to implement such a data structure to maintain `challenge` values is given in [](#implementation-consideration-replay). This guarantees stronger replay protection with a challenge chosen by the Authorization Server itself, at the potential cost of an additional round-trip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - manage a list of witnessed `challenge` values, similar to the previously described `jti` approach. Details how to implement such a data structure to maintain `challenge` values is given in [](#implementation-consideration-replay). This guarantees stronger replay protection with a challenge chosen by the Authorization Server itself, at the potential cost of an additional round-trip.
```

  - use self-contained challenges while not storing the seen challenges. This approach scales well, while only guaranteeing freshness, but no replay protection within the limited time-window chosen by the Authorization Server.
- The Authorization Server generates a challenge that is bound to the Client Instance's session, such that a specific `challenge` in the Client Attestation PoP JWT is expected and validated. The Authorization Server may either:
  - send the challenge as part of another previous response to the Client Instance of providing the challenge explicitly
  - reuse an existing artefact of the Client Instance's session, e.g. the authorization code. This MUST be communicated out-of-band between Authorization Server and Client.

> It is important for successful replay attack detection to have considerable time synchronization between Authorization Server and the Client. Furthermore, the Authorization Server MUST reject Client Attestation PoP JWTs that have `iat` values too far in the future or past beyond an agreeable time difference.

Reviewer 2: A fresh challenge should mean the `iat` value check may be relaxed. Just like in DPoP.

Quoting from DPoP

> Because clock skews between servers and clients may be large, servers MAY limit DPoP proof lifetimes by using server-provided nonce values containing the time at the server rather than comparing the client-supplied iat time to the time at the server. Nonces created in this way yield the same result even in the face of arbitrarily large clock skews.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because clock skews between servers and clients may be large, Authorization Servers MAY limit Client Attestation PoP lifetimes by using server-provided challenge values containing the time at the server rather than comparing the client-supplied iat time to the time at the server. Challenges created in this way yield the same result even in the face of arbitrarily large clock skews.

In any case the Authorization Server SHOULD ensure the freshness of the Client Attestation PoP by checking either the iat claim or if present the server provided challenge, is within an acceptable time window.
```

<br/>

> * Field Name: attestation-challenge

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Field Name: Attestation-Challenge
```
